Hey guys, we are back.
Let's talk about the concept of a technology stack.
You've heard it, I'm sure, so let's take some time to clear up
the knots in your head, so you can finally
see clearly and get what I'm saying.
When we talk about technology, you've
probably noticed that I frequently
will say that a software or a program runs
ON something instead of IN something.
If I said "Mozilla Firefox runs on OS X, Macintosh OS X,"
what do you think that I meant by that?
What I mean by that is that your operating system
acts as a gigantic interpreter for your computer,
and, as a result, any software or program can do its own thing
within the space that your operating system has created for it.
Now, the way that we frequently think
of this to save us mental energy
is to think of it like a physical stack. And that's
where you hear ON as opposed to IN.
Let's imagine an office building.
Can you build floor two without building floor one?
Well, no. If floor one is, let's say, your operating system,
say it's Microsoft Windows, what is floor two?
Well, it could be one of many things,
but let's say it's your browser.
It could also be your email client, it could be your favorite tool,
it could be a word processor, whatever.
Now, what could you build on top of what I just said?
Well, you could build websites on top of your browser,
with a browser now we can run programs that run
within a program within an operating system.
It's like one of those crazy Russian doll things.
So the stack paradigm is the one way to think about technology
and I suggest you try your best to start looking at it this way.
Now any set of technology or programming
languages that works together
and enables each other will and can be referred to as a stack.
Much like the floors are stacked on top of each other,
programming languages and technology
can be stacked on top of each other as well.
Now, if you forgot everything I just said, and if there was
only one thing you needed to understand, it's this.
To build a website, or mobile app, or mobile site,
we have to use a series of programming languages
and technologies to get the job done.
When I say web stack, I'm referring
to exactly that series of technology,
what is the combination of technologies that this website uses.
And 90% of the time we hear the phrase "tech stack,"
we're going to be talking about web and mobile apps.
You very rarely hear "tech stack" being
referred to a simple website,
because it doesn't really matter, or we can easily guess what it uses.
Now, any given common tech stack is going to be broken down
into four different categories, with interchangeable parts.
Let's take an example, the most common
example you can possibly find, which is LAMP.
A website or web app could be built using the LAMP stack.
Now, every single letter in this acronym stands for something.
L is the first spot and it stands for Linux.
Linux is going to be the operating system that is most commonly
used on servers, therefore the L is reserved for that spot.
A is Apache, which is also the most
common technology installed on servers
to provide the ability to store, sort,
and transmit files between servers.
I wouldn't worry too much about Apache, just
understand that servers have their own software
that is designed to host websites and transmit files effectively.
Now, the M in LAMP refers to the technology
MySQL, spelled M-Y-S-Q-L,
it's Sequel, but you could also say
MySQL, which we'll actually cover later,
but what that is is it refers to the database
that's used to store information
like images, form data, user profile information, on and on.
The last one in the acronym for LAMP is the P, which stands for PHP,
and that's the language that's used to run
all the back-end functions of the website.
So to go backwards, you would use a PHP programming language
to talk to the MySQL database, and ask
for some records by communicating
with the Apache software that runs on
that server, which would then have to
relay that information down to Linux,
which is the operating system on that server.
Don't worry too much about these details.
So that's it, a very common technology stack for websites.
Guess who uses LAMP?
If you can take a wild guess.
Facebook. Facebook is built on LAMP.
Also, probably a million other websites.
If I were to change one of the pieces,
let's say we wanted to change
the server operating system to Windows instead of Linux,
that would change LAMP to LAMP's evil sister, WAMP.
And not to be forgotten, of course, the other sibling, MAMP,
which you can guess what that is, hopefully.
Macintosh OS makes MAMP.
Think of it like a sandwich.
The bread and the buns are the PHP and the Linux,
and in the middle you have the meat and veggies,
which is the Apache and MySQL, all comes
together for the lamest sandwich ever.
In the next couple of lectures, we're going to talk about
common stacks that you should be familiar with.
How do stacks, for instance, work with mobile apps?
What does my company use?
Spoiler: I don't know, but we can probably figure it out.
All right guys, I'll see you the next lecture!